.TH Calendar 3MOD "local: Hasch"
.SH NAME
Calendar, Time, Date, Year, Month, Day, Hour, Minute, Second,
Weekday, Week, Yearday, Daytime, Calendarday, CalendarInfo,
CurrentTime, ConvertTime, ConvertDate, ConvertCald,
CTime, CDate, CUltimo, CWeekday, DateOK, TimeToString,
SetFirstOfWeek, GetTimezone, SetTimezone, GetLocaltime, SetLocaltime \-
date and time calculations
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
TYPE
   Time         = SystemTypes.TIME;
   Date         = LONGCARD;
.sp 0.6v
   Year         = CARDINAL;
   Month        = [1..12];
   Day          = [1..31];
   Hour         = [0..23];
   Minute       = [0..59];
   Second       = [0..59];
   Weekday      = (Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu, Fri, Sat, Sun);
   Week         = [1..53];
   Yearday      = [1..366];
.sp 0.6v
   Daytime      = RECORD
                     hour:    Hour;
                     minute:  Minute;
                     second:  Second;
                  END;
.sp 0.6v
   Calendarday  = RECORD
                     year:    Year;
                     month:   Month;
                     day:     Day;
                  END;
.sp 0.6v
   CalendarInfo = RECORD
                     weekday: Weekday;
                     week:    Week;
                     yearday: Yearday;
                  END;

PROCEDURE CurrentTime(): Time;


PROCEDURE ConvertTime(time:            Time;
                      VAR date:        Date;
                      VAR daytime:     Daytime);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE ConvertDate(date: Date; VAR calendarday: Calendarday);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE ConvertCald(calendarday:     Calendarday;
                      VAR info:        CalendarInfo);

PROCEDURE CTime(date: Date; daytime: Daytime): Time;
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE CDate(year: Year; month: Month; day: Day): Date;
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE CUltimo(year: Year; month: Month): Date;
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE CWeekday(date: Date): Weekday;
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE DateOK(year, month, day: CARDINAL): BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE TimeToString(time: Time;
                       VAR string: ARRAY OF CHAR);

PROCEDURE SetFirstOfWeek(weekday: Weekday);

PROCEDURE GetTimezone(VAR tzname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE SetTimezone(    tzname: ARRAY OF CHAR);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE GetLocaltime(VAR delay: Time);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE SetLocaltime(    delay: Time);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Calendar
is a module supporting date and time calculations with
the Caesar/Gregorian (i.e., our) calendar. Too,
the time in the form used by the system can be handled.
.PP
.I Time
is a
.B LONGINT
value of seconds since 00:00:00 GMT Jan 1, 1970 .
.I Date
is a day number since some date in ancient history
- not later than Jan 1, 0001 -
where consecutive days are always represented as consecutive numbers.
Note that in 1582, the year of the Gregor calendar reformation, some
dates were skipped, and that leap years occurred more often before.
.br
.I Week
is a week's number in the year - edge weeks belonging to the year that
contains more days of them.
Only therefore it matters which weekday is
considered the first in a week, Sunday or Monday (default), which
can be specified with
.I SetFirstOfWeek.
.PP
.I CurrentTime
returns the system's idea of what the time is.
.PP
.I ConvertTime, ConvertDate
and
.I ConvertCald
convert/expand values of
.I Time, Date
or
.I Calendarday
into more and more reasonable information.
.PP
The functions
.I CTime
and
.I CDate
do the opposite. Correct results, however, are guaranteed for correct
arguments only.
Which calendar dates are correct, i.e. were or will be used actually,
can be detected with
.I DateOK.
.PP
.I CUltimo
returns the date of the last day of the given month.
.PP
.I CWeekday
returns the weekday upon which the given date falls.
.PP
.I TimeToString
converts a
.I Time
value
.IR time
into a character string
.IR string
of the form, e.g. "Thu Jan 21 16:53:27 1988 MEZ".
Its first 24 characters always have fixed positions;
the rest of it is the local time zone name as returned by
.I GetTimezone (see below).
.PP
As the system operates in GMT (Greenwich Mean Time),
.I Ctime, ConvertTime
and
.I TimeToString
use a delay in seconds relative to GMT to compute day and hour
in the locally appropriate way. This delay and the name of the local
time zone are initialized according to the environment parameter
.B TZ,
that should contain an optional non-numeric string for the time zone name
and a small integer value specifying hours, or a large integer (with
absolute value >= 60) specifying seconds. These can be looked up
cf. altered with
.I GetLocaltime, SetLocaltime, GetTimezone
and
.I SetTimezone.
.SH AUTHOR
Martin Hasch, University of Ulm
.SH "SEE ALSO"
time(2), date(1), Clock(3MOD), Strings(3MOD), Environ(3MOD)
