.ds iN "\f2i1\fP\ \&.\&. \f2i8\fP
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+3*\s-3\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\f3\\$1\fP"
..
.TH E 3MOD "local:Stanglow"
.SH NAME
E, rror0, rror1, rror2, rror3, rror4, rror5, rror6, rror7, rror8, done, success, setmode, getmode, ExitCode, AddFatalLine, EnterInitProc, EnterExitProc, ClearInitProc, ClearExitProc, SigSet, UserSignal, FatalSignal, Signals \- formatted error messages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.DS
TYPE 
   ExitCode = [-1..255];
   SigSet   = SET OF Sig;

CONST
   UserSignal  = SigSet {SIGHUP, SIGINT, SIGQUIT, SIGTERM};
   FatalSignal = SigSet {SIGILL..SIGUSR2} - SigSet{SIGKILL};
   
(* diagnostic *)

PROCEDURE done () : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE success() : FmtExitCode;

(* error handling *)

PROCEDURE setmode (mode : BITSET);

PROCEDURE getmode (VAR mode : BITSET);

(* output *)

PROCEDURE rror0 (exit : ExitCode; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR);

PROCEDURE rror1 (exit : ExitCode; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR;
   i1 : ARRAY OF BYTE);

PROCEDURE rror2 (exit : ExitCode; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR; 
   i1, i2 : ARRAY OF BYTE);

(* ... *)

PROCEDURE rror8 (exit : ExitCode; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR;
   i1, i2, i3, i4, i5, i6, i7 , i8 : ARRAY OF BYTE);

(* useful procedures *)

PROCEDURE AddFatalLine(text : ARRAY OF CHAR);

PROCEDURE EnterInitProc(proc : PROC);

PROCEDURE EnterExitProc(proc : PROC);

PROCEDURE ClearInitProc();

PROCEDURE ClearExitProc();

PROCEDURE Signals(set : SigSet; proc : PROC);
.DE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IR E . rror0
\&..\&
.IR E . rror8
(the procedures are intended to be called qualified,
that explains their strange names)
convert their parameters \*(iN,
instantiate them into the format string
.I fmt ,
add some
information and output the whole
text as an error message to
.IR StdIO . stderr .
Finally
.IR E . rror0
\&..\&
.IR E . rror8
will terminate the
current process
if
.I exit 
does not equal zero (0).
.IP "\f2exit\fP\ =\ 0"
An error message of the following form is issued,
where 'formatted message' is produced from the parameter
.IR fmt ,
\*(iN
according to the
general formatting
capabilities
described in
Printf(3MOD).
.DS
     [error] formatted message
.DE
.IP "\f2exit\fP\ =\ -1"
Having output the error message,
.IR E . rror0
\&..\&
.IR E . rror8
send
.B SIGIOT
to the current process.
This is a sure kill and
will produce a core dump
for program debugging by
mdb(1).
.DS
     [panic] formatted message
     [a.out] Panic exit, core dumped. Stop.
.DE
.IP "\f2exit\fP\ >\ 0"
Program termination is realized by
calling
.IR SysExit . Exit 
using
.I exit
as exit code:
.DS
     [fatal] formatted message
     [a.out] Exit code 1. Stop.
.DE
.LP
Each call of
.I AddFatalLine
defines a further
line of
.I text
inserted by
.IR E . rror0
\&..\&
.IR E . rror8
into a fatal or panic error message.
An empty
string
can be used to
clear previously
defined text.
.LP
Error messages are echoed to further files,
if
.IR LongStrings \&. Echo
has been called for
.I stderr 
before.
.LP
.I EnterInitProc
defines
.I proc
to be called before
an error message is issued.
Intended for terminal resetting in
those cases, the output would otherwise be unreadable
(f.i. when using
.IR Windows (3MOD)).
.I EnterExitProc
works the other way round
and defines a
procedure
that is called
after the output of an error message.
May be used to restore a terminal device. 
.LP
.I ClearInitProc
and
.I ClearExitProc
delete preceding definitions by
.I EnterInitProc
and
.IR EnterExitProc \&.
.LP
.I done
returns
.B TRUE
if the
last call of
.IR E . rror0
\&..\&
.IR E . rror8
was successful,
more detailed information
can be obtained
by
.I success
.RI ( FmtExitCode
is imported from
.IR Printf ).
.LP
.I setmode
defines a new error handling mode
.I mode
which is by default
set to
.IR Printf . Default.
.I getmode
yields the current mode.
.LP
.I Signals
defines
.I proc
to be called,
if one of the
signals
in
.I set
is received.
The meaning of the signals
suggest their
partition into
.I UserSignal
(assuming these signals are produced by the user)
and
.IR FatalSignal \&,
even if these sets may not be suitable for all
applications.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Diagnostic is unnecessary
unless default
error handling strategy has been explicitly
modified
by prior calls
of
.IR setmode \&.
See
.IR Printf(3MOD)
for more details.
.LP
Please note that program termination
depends on a successful output of the error message.
Errors may result
from
illegal format strings
or from problems when writing to
.I stderr
(error code
.BR CannotWriteStderr ).
.LP
Error message issued by
.I E
for diagnostic reasons
will indicate the affected procedure call:
.IP
.DS
[fatal] E.rror3(-1,"%*u",...);
        Bad Format: too few format elements.
[a.out] Exit code 204. Stop.
.DE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR mdb(1), 
.IR signal(2),
.IR Printf (3MOD),
.IR LongStrings (3MOD),
.IR StdIO (3MOD)
