.de BT
.IP "\f3\\$1\fP"
..
.de IT
.IP "\f2\\$1\fP"
..
.TH EditWindow 3MOD "local:Stanglow"
.SH NAME
EditWindow, LocalMoves, EnableLocalMoves, MapChar, FunctionKeyReaction, DefineReaction, EnableSingleCharFK, ReadOneChar, CallOnce, Wait, Beep, GetWindowLine, Return, Ignore, Default \- window editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.DS
TYPE 
   FunctionKeyReaction =
      PROCEDURE (Window, VAR FunctionKey, VAR BOOLEAN);

CONST 
   LocalMoves = 
      FunctionKeySet {up,down,left,right,home,backspace};

(* editing *)

PROCEDURE EditWindow(win : Window; predefined : BOOLEAN;
   VAR exitkey : FunctionKey );

PROCEDURE EnableLocalMoves (directions : FunctionKeySet);

PROCEDURE MapChar(char : CHAR; key : FunctionKey);

PROCEDURE DefineReaction(key : FunctionKey;
   reactproc : FunctionKeyReaction);

PROCEDURE EnableSingleCharFK (recognize : BOOLEAN);

PROCEDURE CallOnce(proc : PROC);

(* other useful procedures *)

PROCEDURE ReadOneChar(win : Window; echo : BOOLEAN) : CHAR;

PROCEDURE Wait(w : Window);

PROCEDURE Beep();

PROCEDURE GetWindowLine(win : Window; line : CARDINAL;
   VAR text : ARRAY OF CHAR;
   clearleadingspace, clearfillupspace : BOOLEAN);

(* prototype procedures with type 'FunctionKeyReaction' *)

PROCEDURE Ignore (win : Window; VAR exitkey : FunctionKey;
   VAR return : BOOLEAN);

PROCEDURE Return (win : Window; VAR exitkey : FunctionKey;
   VAR return : BOOLEAN);

PROCEDURE Default (win : Window; VAR exitkey : FunctionKey;
   VAR return : BOOLEAN);
.DE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I EditWindow
provides a simple screen-oriented editor for
windows created
by
.IR Windows (3MOD).
The commands supported
are adapted
from
.IR vi (1)
even it was not intended to realize
a copy of this tool as a Modula-2 library routine.
.LP
Any window
.I win
can be edited by
.I EditWindow 
and
no precondition
concerning current window attributes and current cursor position
are required.
Initial
attribute set and cursor position
of
.I win
are restored after 
editing.
.LP
.I EditWindow
supports
three modes:
.BR escape ,
.BR insert ,
and 
.BR replace.
Refer to section
.B EDITING COMMANDS
for description.
Editing
always starts
at the upper left
corner of
.IR win ,
any typeahead of input
(before
.I EditWindow
was called)
is ignored.
If
.I predefined
is
.B TRUE ,
.I EditWindow
displays the old contents
of
.I win
and switches to mode
.BR escape .
If
.I predefined is
FALSE,
.I win
is cleared and
.I insert
becomes the starting mode.
.LP
EditWindow returns
with
.I exitkey
set to
.B nokey
if
either
return
is
entered on the last
window line or
an explicit
quit command is issued (see below).
By default any function key will also
finish editing.
In this case
the terminating key
is assigned to
.I exitkey 
(values to be imported from
.IR FunctionKeys (3MOD)).
Arrows and home key on keyboard
are made available for editing
by
.IR EnableLocalMoves 
.RI ( directions
should be a subset of
.IR LocalMoves).
Single character function keys are not recognized
by
.I EditWindow
unless
.I EnableSingleCharFK
was called before
with
.I recognize
set to
.BR TRUE 
(default can be restored calling
.IR EnableSingleCharFK (\c
.BR FALSE )).
When enabling
single function keys,
.I backspace
must be defined as
a local move,
otherwise
.I EditWindow
will react rather unconventionally
to backspace editing.
.LP
.I EditWindow
has a large variety of applications,
since
the exit key returned
can be interpreted as the
result of editing
which decides about what to do next
(f.i. positioning within screen masks where single input field
are represented as
windows edited by
means of
.IR EditWindow ).
.IR MapChar ,
.IR DefineReaction ,
and
.IR EnableLocalMoves
extend the capabilities of
this feature.
.LP
.I DefineReaction
defines a procedure
.I reactproc
that is called by
.I EditWindow
whenever
the function key
.I key
is read.
During this call
.I reactproc
may update the currently edited window
which is received as the first parameter.
By means of the
boolean
.B VAR
parameter
set by
.IR reactproc ,
.I EditWindow
decides 
whether to terminate editing
or not.
If
.I reactproc
yields
.B TRUE
.I EditWindow
returns with
.I exitkey
set the
value defined
by
.IR reactproc
for its
second parameter.
.LP
.IR Default  ,
.IR Return ,
and
.I Ignore
are prototype procedures of
type
.IR FunctionKeyReaction \&.
If used
as arguments to
.IR DefineReaction ,
.IR Return
causes
.I EditWindow
to return with
.I exitkey
=
.B nokey ,
.IR Ignore
outputs a acoustic signal
and continues editing 
and
.IR Default
resets the default reaction
for
.IR key \&.
.LP
.I MapChar 
allows
mapping of any character
.I char
into a function key
.IR key .
During
subsequent
calls of
.I EditWindow
input of
.I char
will have the same effect
than
.I key .
Thus, if function keys are needed for certain applications
but not supported by
input terminals,
control characters can be defined instead.
.LP
Note that
.I EditWindow
will neither recognize function keys nor
map characters during uncompleted editing commands
in escape mode.
.LP
.I CallOnce
defines a
procedure
.I proc
that is called by
.I EditWindow
having read the first input character.
.I proc
is executed
exactly one time.
.I CallOnce
does not affect
more than one call
of
.I EditWindow.
.LP
Some more
useful procedures
independent from
editing window
are provided by this module as well.
.LP
.I GetWindowLine
copies
line
.I line
of window
.I win
into string
.IR text.
Blanks before
first or following last
non space character on line are ignored
if
.I clearleadingspace
respectively
.I clearfillupspace
equals
.BR TRUE \&.
.I GetWindowLine
will return an empty
string,
if illegal parameters are received or
output does not fit into
.IR text .
.LP 
.I Beep
outputs an acoustic signal to
the device associated with
.IR StdIO . stderr \&.
.LP
.I Wait
suspends program execution until
any key is hit
(typeahead of input is ignored).
.I win
is used as an argument to
.IR Window . WindowRead
but remains unaffected.
.LP
.I ReadOneChar
returns the first character
read from
the current cursor position
of
.IR win 
(typeahead not recognized).
If
.I echo
is
.I TRUE
input will be echoed.
Initial window attributes and cursor position are
restored.
.LP
.SH EDITING COMMANDS
Within the description of editing commands
input keys with special meaning
are referred as follows:
.LP
.ta \w'<DEL>  'u
.B <CR> \t
carriage return (15C)
.br
.B <LF> \t
line feed (12C)
.br
.B <BS> \t
backspace (10C)
.br
.B <ESC> \t
escape (33C)
.br
.B <DEL> \t
delete (177C)
.br
.B <SP> \t
a space/blank (40C)
.br
.I {vis} \t
any visible character
(40C-176C)
.ta
.LP
By default
.I EditWindow
follows 
UNIX-Conventions
and reacts in the same way
to
.B <CR>
and
.BR <LF> .
Nevertheless
both input keys are distinguished.
This allows mapping of
.B <LF>
without altering the conventional behavior
of the return key
on the keyboard.
.SS Insert Mode
.IP "{\f2vis\fP}"
inserted at the current cursor position
.BT <ESC>
switch to escape mode
.BT "<BS> <DEL>"
erase character before current cursor position
(restricted to characters inserted on current line
since last switch to insert mode)
.BT "<CR> <LF>"
break line at current cursor position and terminate
editing if on last window line
.SS Replace Mode
.IP "{\f2vis\fP}"
replace character at the current cursor position
.BT <ESC>
switch to escape mode
.BT "<BS> <DEL>"
move left
.BT "<CR> <LF>"
move to beginning of next line or terminate editing if on the last one
.SS Escape Mode
.BT i
switch to insert mode
.BT I
move to first non space character on line and switch to insert mode
.BT a
move right and switch to insert mode (append)
.BT A
move beyond last non space character on line and switch to insert mode
.BT o
insert an empty line after the current one and switch to insert mode
.BT O
insert an empty line at the current one and switch to insert mode 
.BT R
switch to replace mode
.IP r\f1{\f2vis\f1}
replace character at current position by
.I vis
.BT J
join current line with the next one
.BT "h <BS> <DEL>"
move left
.BT "l <SP>"
move right 
.BT "k \(em"
move up (same column)
.BT "j +"
move down (same column, editing is not terminated if on last line)
.BT 0
move to beginning of current line
.BT ^
move to first non space character of current line
.BT $
move to last non space character of current line
.BT G
move to last line
.IP \f1[\f31\f1-\f39\f1][\f30\f1-\f39\f1]+\f3G\f1
move to the specified line
.BT w
move to next word begin (word is a sequence of non space characters)
.BT e
move to next word end
.BT b
move to last word begin
.BT "W E B"
as lower case letters, but words are now coherent sequences of either
alpha numeric or punctation characters 
.BT x
delete character at current cursor position
.BT dd
delete current line
.BT "d0 d^ d$ dw dW de dE db dB"
delete to the position specified by second character of command
(deletion always restricted to current line)
.BT "<CR> <LF>"
move to beginning of next line or terminate editing if on the last one
.BT ZZ
terminate editing
.RI ( exitkey
=
.BR nokey )
.SS Local Moves (if supported)
.LP
The following function keys are recognized by
.I EditWindow
only if they have been enabled
by
.I EnableLocalMoves 
before.
None of them will switch the current editing mode.
.BT up
move up (same column)
.BT down
move down (same column, no termination on last line)
.BT right
move right
(same as
.B <SP>
in insert mode)
.BT "left backspace"
as
.B <BS>
(recation depends on current editing mode)
.BT home
move to upper left corner of window
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I EditWindow
outputs an acoustic
signal (using
.IR Beep)
as an answer to
illegal input.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR Windows (3MOD),
.IR FunctionKeys (3MOD)
.SH BUGS
.I Beep
will not work as expected,
if
.I stderr
is not associated with
the device where you want to hear
the acoustic signal.
