.ds iN "\f2i1\fP\ \&.\&. \f2i8\fP
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+3*\s-3\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\f3\\$1\fP"
..
.TH F 3MOD "local:Stanglow"
.SH NAME
F, printf0, printf1, printf2, printf3, printf4, printf5, printf6, printf7, printf8, done, success, setmode, getmode \- formatted output to files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
(* diagnostic *)

PROCEDURE done () : BOOLEAN;
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE success() : FmtExitCode;

(* error handling *)

PROCEDURE setmode (mode : BITSET);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE getmode (VAR mode : BITSET);

(* output *)

PROCEDURE printf0 (file : FILE; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE printf1 (file : FILE; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR; i1 : ARRAY OF BYTE);
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE printf2 (file : FILE; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR; i1,i2 : ARRAY OF BYTE);
.sp 0.8v
(* ... *)
.sp 0.8v
PROCEDURE printf8 (file : FILE; fmt : ARRAY OF CHAR;
   i1, i2, i3, i4, i5, i6, i7 , i8 : ARRAY OF BYTE);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I printf0
\&..\&
.I printf8
convert their parameters \*(iN,
instantiate them into the format string
.I fmt
and write the resulting text to the file
.I file .
Refer to
.IR Printf (3MOD)
for a detailed description of formatting
capabilities.
.LP
The output
to
.I file
is echoed
after suitable calls
of
.IR LongStrings \&. Echo .
.LP
.I done
returns
.B TRUE
if the
last call of
.I printf0
\&..\&
.I printf8
was successful,
more detailed information
can be obtained
by
.I success
.RI (FmtExitCode
is imported from
.IR Printf).
.LP
.I setmode
defines a new error handling mode
.I mode
which is by default
set to
.IR Printf . Default.
.I getmode
yields the current mode.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Diagnostic is unnecessary
unless default
error handling strategy has been explicitly
modified
by prior calls
of
.IR setmode \&.
See
.IR Printf (3MOD)
for more details.
.LP
Besides for reasons of illegal format
strings,
.I printf1
\&.\&.
.I printf8
will fail 
if
.I file
cannot be written
(error code
.BR CannotWriteFile ).
.LP
Error messages issued by
.I F
will contain information
about
the their reason (including a system message if available)
and the affected procedure call:
.IP
.DS
[fatal] F.printf0(...,"Hallo.\n");
        Bad file number: cannot write to file.
[a.out] Exit code 202. Stop.
.DE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR Printf (3MOD),
.IR StdIO (3MOD),
.IR LongStrings (3MOD)
