.ds iN "\f2i1\fP\ \&.\&. \f2i8\fP
.ie t .ds St "\v'.3m'\s+2*\s-2\v'-.3m'
.el .ds St *
.de cC
.IP "\f3\\$1\fP"
..
.TH Printf 3MOD "local:Stanglow"
.SH NAME
Printf, FmtExitCode, SynError, OutError \- common base of formatted output toolkit
.SH SYNOPSIS
.DS
CONST
   Pabort = 201;   Labort     = 205;
   Fabort = 202;   WabortP    = 206;
   Sabort = 203;   WabortA    = 207;
   Eabort = 204;   PanicAbort = 255;

   TellSyntax  = 1;  TellOutput  = 2;
   AbortSyntax = 3;  AbortOutput = 4;
   Default     = {TellSyntax .. TellOutput};

TYPE
   FmtExitCode = (Success, Undefined, FmtPanic,
      IllegalWidth, TooFewFormElems, TooManyFormElems,
      IllegalConvChar, MinHat0Comb, BslashAnd0,
      BadOctalChar, AllocFailed, StringTooSmall,
      CannotWriteFile, CannotWriteStderr,
      CannotWriteStdout, IllegalWindowOffset,
      WindowTooSmall, CannotFlushWindow,
      CannotAccessWindow, CannotWriteWindow);

   FmtExitSet  = SET OF FmtExitCode;

CONST
   SynError = FmtExitSet {IllegalWidth .. BadOctalChar};
   OutError = FmtExitSet {AllocFailed .. CannotWriteWindow};

PROCEDURE Printf (output : Long; no : CARDINAL; VAR fmt :
   ARRAY OF CHAR; VAR i1 ,i2, i3, i4, i5, i6, i7,i8 :
   ARRAY OF BYTE) : FmtExitCode;
.DE
.SH DESCRIPTION
This module is the common base of
.IR P (3MOD),
.IR F (3MOD),
.IR S (3MOD),
.IR E (3MOD),
.IR L (3MOD)
and
.IR W (3MOD)
which realize formatted output
to various devices.
It is not intended to be used directly but the declarations exported
from here
are common to all of the mentioned modules.
Furthermore the description
of
.IR Printf 's
formatting capabilities applies to all output routines of this toolkit.
.LP
.I Printf
reads the format string
.I fmt \.
Any character not belonging to
a escape sequence introduced by
.B \e
or a format element
introduced by
.B %
is simply appended
to
.I output
(type
.I Long
imported
from
.IR LongStrings (3MOD)).
Escape sequences
are substituted
by a single
character
while format elements
are instantiated
by the first
.I no
parameter
of \*(iN
(\c
.I no
may be zero).
.LP
.I Printf
returns
.B Success
on successful completion,
a value out of
.I SynError
in case of illegal format specifications
and
.B AllocFailed
if output cannot be appended to
.I output.
.LP
The parameters of
.I Printf
are declared
as
.B VAR
parameters
for reasons of efficiency only.
.I Printf
will never updated them.
Please note
that this does not affect in any way the possibility to output
expressions using the superior modules
.IR P ,
.I F
etc.
.SH "FORMAT ELEMENTS"
Format elements do not contain any space character and fulfill
the following syntax
.RI ( number
is an unsigned sequence of digits,
.I any
stands for any
single character):
.ne 11v
.IP \f2formatelement\fP
:
.B  %
.RI [ align ]
.RI [ width ]
[
.B \&.
.IR scale ]
.I convchar
.LP
.IP \f2align\fP
:
.RB [ + ]
[
.B 0
|
.RB [ \(em | ^ ]
.RB [ "\e
.IR any ]
]
.IP \f2width\fP
:
.I number
|
.B \*(St
.IP \f2scale\fP
:
.I number
|
.B \*(St
.LP
.IP \f2convchar\fP
.TS
tab(*);
c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb 1 c 1 cb.
:*b*|*c*|*d*|*e*|*f*|*j*|*l*|*o*|*s*|*u*|*x*|*y
|*B*|*C*|*D*|*E*|*F*|*J*|*L*|*O*|*S*|*U*|*X*|*Y
.TE
.LP
Each format element defines a field in the output stream
that is by default as wide as necessary to insert the
result of a parameter conversion.
The field width can be expanded
by specifying
.IR width .
If not given as an explicit
.I number
but as
.B \*(St
.I Printf
uses
the value of the next yet unused parameter
(interpreted as a
.BR CARDINAL )
as width indication.
Larger values
than 2048
will cause
.I Printf
to return with
.BR IllegalWidth \&,
values less or equal than the defaults have no effect.
In all other cases
the output field is filled up by leading blanks.
Fillup character and alignment strategy may be altered by means of
.I align:
.LP
.cC +
Any numeric output will be signed (by default positive
values do not get a
.BR + sign).
.cC \(em
The output will be left aligned within its field. This option
has no effect if
.I width
is omitted.
.cC 0
The output of numeric values is filled up with leading zeroes
.RB ( 0 ).
This option implies
.B \(em.
.cC ^
The fill up characters are inserted before the leading sign and the first digit
of a number.
.cC "\e \f2any\fP"
defines
.I any
to become the fill up character
.LP
.I Printf
will return with
.B MinHat0Comb
or
.B  BslashAnd0
on
illegal combinations of these options (refer to syntax description above).
.B 0
and
.B ^
have no effect,
if the output value is not a number.
.LP
On output
of real values,
.I scale
fixes
the number of digits following
the decimal point.
Other numeric output is not affected
while strings are cut to the length
given by
.I scale
before
there are aligned within their output fields.
Printf
will use the next yet unused parameter
as
.I scale
indication,
if
.B \*(St
is specified.
.LP
Since
.I Printf
has no idea about the actual types
of the arguments
corresponding to
its formal parameters,
.I convchar
is used to determine
the conversions
to be executed
for
the next yet unused
parameter of
\*(iN.
.I Printf
will not accept any other conversion character
than those listed and described below
(error return value:
.BR IllegalConvChar).
In detail the
specifications of
.I convchar
have the following effect:
.cC u
decimal
output of a
.B CARDINAL
.cC x
hexadecimal
output of a
.B CARDINAL
.cC o
octal
output of a
.B CARDINAL
.cC d
decimal output
of an
.B INTEGER
.cC f
output of a
.B REAL
in floating point notation
.cC e
output of a
.B REAL
in its normalized exponential form
.cC c
output of a single
.B CHAR
.cC s
output of an
.B
ARRAY OF CHAR
.R
until the first
null byte
(0C)
or
the high bound of the
array
is reached
.cC b
output of a
.B BOOLEAN
as text
.B TRUE
or
.B FALSE
.cC y
output of a
.B BOOLEAN
as text
.B yes
or
.B no
.cC j
output of a
.B BOOLEAN
as text
.B ja
or
.B nein
.cC l
output of a
.B CHAR
.I width
times
(i.e. use the character given as parameter to draw a line of length
.IR width ).
Without
explicit
.I width
indication same as
.BR c.
.LP
If
.I convchar
is an upper case letter,
.I Printf
treats
the parameter associated
to the currently processed format element as
the address
.RB ( SYSTEM \&. ADDRESS )
of an variable to be output
(respectively as
a
.B POINTER
.B TO
the type
expected for the
corresponding
lower case letters).
If using
.BR S ,
ensure
that
that null byte is found at the end of
the string or
limit output size by specifying
.I scale.
.LP
Note that
.BR u ,
.BR o ,
.BR x ,
and
.BR d ,
are legal conversion characters
to output any type
which has the
same size (in bytes)
as the expected one.
This feature can be used
to output an enumeration value
(i.e its ordinal number)
or an address (equal size presumed).
Furthermore these conversion characters may be used
to output
the ascii-value of a
.B CHAR .
Vice versa
.B c
may be used to output a character
that is specified by a small
.BR CARDINAL - or
.BR INTEGER -value.
You should avoid other combinations than those mentioned,
the results are undefined.
.LP
If
the number of format elements within
.I fmt
plus the number of variable scale of width indications
.RB ( * )
is not
equal to
.IR no ,
.I Printf
will return with an error
.RB ( TooManyFormElems ,
.BR TooFewFormElems ).
Using the high level routines
of
.IR P ,
.IR F ,
.IR S ,
.IR E ,
.IR W ,
and
.I L
the expected number of format elements
(including additional parameter used
for scale or width indication)
derives from the procedure name respectively
from the number of formal parameters
declared as
.B ARRAY OF
.BR BYTE \&.
.LP
.B %%
will not be interpreted as
a format element. A single percent character is output instead.
.SH "ESCAPE SEQUENCES"
Any appearance of the following escape sequences in format string
.I fmt
is substituted as listed:
.IP \f3\en\fP
newline (line feed) (12C)
.IP \f3\er\fP
carriage return (15C)
.IP \f3\et\fP
horizontal tab (11C)
.IP \f3\ee\fP
escape (33C)
.IP \f3\ef\fP
form feed (14C)
.IP \f3\eb\fP
backspace (10C)
.IP \f3\e&\fP
bell (7C)
.IP \f3\eQ\fP
double quote (")
.IP \f3\eq\fP
quote(')
.IP \f3\e%\fP
percent (%)
.IP \f3\e\e\fP
backslash (\e)
.IP \f3\e\fP[\f30\fP-\f37\fP]+\f3C\fP
character specified by
.RB [ 0 - 7 ]+ C \&.
.I Printf
will return
.B BadOctalChar
on illegal character
specifications.
.IP "\f3\e\fP \f2other\fP"
.I other
(where
.I other
is a character not listed above)
.SH EXAMPLES
The formatting capabilities of
.I Printf
are illustrated by means of
module P.
All examples apply accordingly to the other
modules of this toolkit.
The 'input' is left aligned, output has been indented 8 spaces.
.DS
P.rintf1(stdout,"Hello.\en%6l\en",'-');
.br
        Hello.
.br
	------
.br

pi := 4.0 * arctan(1.0);
.br
scale := 3;
.br
P.rintf2(,"100*pi = %f or %e \en",100.0*pi,100.0*pi);
.br
P.rintf1(,"pi (scale=1): %.1e!\en",pi);
.br
P.rintf1(,"pi (scale=1): %.1e!\en",pi);
.br
P.rintf1(,"pi (scale=2): %10.2e!\en",pi);
.br
P.rintf3(,"pi (scale=%u): %.*f!\en",scale,scale,pi);
.br
P.rintf4(,"pi (scale=%u): %+-*.*f!\en",15,scale+1,scale+1,pi);
.br

.br
        100*pi = 314.1592653589793 or 3.141592653589793e+02
.br
        pi (scale=1): 3.1e+00!
.br
        pi (scale=1): 3.1e+00!
.br
        pi (scale=2):   3.14e+00!
.br
        pi (scale=3): 3.142!
.br
        pi (scale=4): +3.1416        !
.br

.br
string := "Hello world.";
.br
P.rintf1("|%s|\en",string);
.br
P.rintf1("|%20s|\en",string);
.br
P.rintf1("|%-20s|\en",string);
.br
P.rintf1("|%20.8s|\en",string);
.br
P.rintf1("|%-20.8s|\en",string);
.br
P.rintf1("|%5.3S|\en",ADR(string[3]));
.br

.br
        |Hello world.|
.br
        |        Hello world.|
.br
        |Hello world.        |
.br
        |            Hello wo|
.br
        |Hello wo            |
.br
        |  lo |
.br

.br
P.rintf4("%10u\en%10u\en%10u\en%10u\en",1,12,223,43333);
.br

.br
                 1
.br
                12
.br
               223
.br
             43333
.br

.br
P.rintf3("1. %+05d\en2. %+05d\en3. %+04d\en",234,-233,1000);
.br

.br
        1. +0234
.br
        2. -0233
.br
        3. +1000
.br

.br
val1 := 1; val2 := -20; val3 := 300;
.br
P.rintf5 ("%+^\e.7d\en%+^\e.7d\en%+^\e.7d\en%7l\en%+^\e.7d\en",
.br
  val1,val2,val3,'=',val1+val2+val3);
.br

.br
        +.....1
.br
        -....20
.br
        +...300
.br
        =======
.br
        +...281
.br

.br
ch := ' ';
.br
P.rintf4(,"char: \Q%c\Q -- octal: %o -- hex: %x -- dec: %u\en",
.br
   ch,ch,ch,ch);
.br

.br
        char: " " -- octal: 40  -- hex: 20  -- dec: 32
.br
.DE
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
As already mentioned
any illegal specification of the format string
will cause
.I Printf
to return immediately with an
result #
.IR Success .
The toolkit in general provides automatic
error recognition and output success control due to the following
conventions.
.LP
Errors on formatted output are divided into
.I SynError
which result from illegal format specifications
and
.I OutError
which result from illegal parameters or
problems on writing to the various devices.
Any error will be treated accordingly to the bits set in the current
error handling mode of the affected module:
.IP \f2TellSyntax\fP
any
.I SynError
(in a format string)
will be reported to
.IR StdIO . stderr .
.IP \f2AbortSyntax\fP
any
.I SynError
will cause a program termination.
The relevant exit code
is given by the constants declared
in
module
.IR Printf
.RI ( P
will terminate with
.I Pabort ,
.I F
with
.I Fabort
etc).
.IP \f2TellOutput\fP
any
.I OutError
will be reported
to
.IR StdIO . stderr .
.IP \f2AbortOutput\fP
any
.I OutError
will terminate the program
(exit codes as above).
.LP
By
default
any error will be reported and
cause a process termination.
Thus,
success of output routines has to be controlled
only if an other error handling mode
than
.I Default
has been explicitly assigned to the modules.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR m2c (1), 
.IR mrc (1),
.IR P (3MOD),
.IR F (3MOD),
.IR E (3MOD),
.IR S (3MOD), 
.IR W (3MOD),
.IR L (3MOD),
.IR LongStrings (3MOD),
.IR StdIO (3MOD)
.SH BUGS
Due to implementation restriction of
.IR mrc (1)
the output routines of
.IR P ,
.IR F ,
.IR S ,
.IR E ,
.IR W ,
and
.IR L
are not available for other arguments than
simple variables
(expressions are rejected with
error code 214).
.LP
A quoted character as an argument
to an
.B ARRAY OF BYTE
will be interpreted as a
string of length one.
Therefore
.B s
.RI ( not
.BR c )
is the suitable conversion character.
.LP
Strange effects will always occur if
the parameter types are not suitable for
the conversion characters.
Using
.BR %f
or
.BR %e 
improperly
may even result in
a floating point exception.
