.TH Screen 3MOD "local:Borchert"
.SH NAME
Screen, OpenScreen, OpenScreenTI, CloseScreen, Lines, Columns,
ClearScreen, SetCursor, MoveCursor \- simple screen operations
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
TYPE Screen;
TYPE CursorVisibility = (normal, invisible, morevisible);

VAR Done: BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE OpenScreen(VAR scr: Screen;
                     outfp: FILE;
                     baudrate: CARDINAL;
                     terminal: ARRAY OF CHAR) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE OpenScreenTI(VAR scr: Screen;
                       outfp: FILE;
                       baudrate: CARDINAL;
                       tinfo: Term);

PROCEDURE InitScreen(scr: Screen);

PROCEDURE CloseScreen(VAR scr: Screen);

PROCEDURE Lines(scr: Screen) : CARDINAL;

PROCEDURE Columns(scr: Screen) : CARDINAL;

PROCEDURE ClearScreen(scr: Screen);

PROCEDURE SetCursor(scr: Screen; line, column: CARDINAL);

PROCEDURE MoveCursor(scr: Screen;
          (* from *) line1, column1,
          (* to *)   line2, column2: CARDINAL);

PROCEDURE Scroll(scr: Screen; down: BOOLEAN;
            line, column: CARDINAL;
            lines, columns: CARDINAL);

PROCEDURE SetCursorVisibility(scr: Screen; visibility: CursorVisibility);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Screen
bases on
.I TermInfo
and offers some optimized screen operations.
.I Done
is set to
.B FALSE
if no capability is found to do the work.
A
.I Screen
can be opened by either
.I OpenScreen
or
.I OpenScreenTI.
Both return on success a screen-pointer
.I scr
which is to be given
on subsequently operations on it.
Any output is sent to
.I outfp.
Padding depends on
.I baudrate.
If
.I baudrate
is zero no padding will be done.
.I OpenScreen
sends an initialization sequence to the terminal
but does not clear the screen.
No
.IR ioctl (2)
system call is done.
So output setting like switch-off of tab-expansion
and newline-mapping are to be done previously.
Thus
.I outp
needs not to be associated with a terminal.
.I InitScreen
repeats the initialization sequence of
.I OpenScreen.
.PP
.I CloseScreen
deallocates the space used for
.I scr
but does not close the output file-pointer
.I outfp
which has been given to
.I OpenScreen
or
.I OpenScreenTI.
.PP
.I Lines
and
.I Columns
return the number of lines and columns of the given screen.
If the associated capability is not set 1 is returned.
.I ClearScreen
clears the screen.
.I SetCursor
moves the cursor to the given position.
Some optimizations (e.g. home position and last line) are done.
.I MoveCursor
takes
.I line1
and
.I column1
as the current position of the cursor
and outputs an optimized sequence to move to
.I line2
and
.I column2.
.PP
.I Scroll
scrolls a given window of a screen
one line downward (\fIdown\fP set to \fBTRUE\fP) or upward (forward).
The window is defined by the upper left corner
given by
.I line
and
.I column
and the number of
.I lines
and
.I columns.
The cursor position is undefined if successful.
.PP
The cursor visibility can be modified by calling
.I SetCursorVisibility.
Supported are \fInormal\fP, \fIinvisible\fP,
and \fImorevisible\fP.
