.TH StdIO 3MOD "local:Borchert"
.SH NAME
StdIO, Fopen, Fclose, Fread, Fwrite, Fseek, Ftell, Feof, Ferror,
Fgetc, Fputc, Fungetc, CloseAll, Fflush, Fdopen \- file i/o
.SH SYNOPSIS
.DS
TYPE FILE;

TYPE MODE = (read, write, append);

VAR stdin, stdout, stderr: FILE;

PROCEDURE Fopen(VAR f: FILE; name: ARRAY OF CHAR;
                mode: MODE; buffered: BOOLEAN) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fdopen(VAR f: FILE; fd: CARDINAL; mode: MODE;
                 buffered: BOOLEAN) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fclose(f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fread(ptr: ADDRESS; size: CARDINAL;
                VAR nitems: CARDINAL; f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fwrite(ptr: ADDRESS; size: CARDINAL;
                 VAR nitems: CARDINAL; f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fseek(f: FILE; offset: SystemTypes.OFF;
                whence: CARDINAL) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Ftell(f: FILE;
                VAR pos: SystemTypes.OFF) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Feof(f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Ferror(f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fgetc(VAR ch: CHAR; f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fputc(ch: CHAR; f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fungetc(ch: CHAR; f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE CloseAll() : BOOLEAN;

PROCEDURE Fflush(f: FILE) : BOOLEAN;
.DE
.SH DESCRIPTION
There are three normally open streams associated with the
standard open files:
.PP
.ta \w'stdout      'u
stdin	standard input file
.br
stdout	standard output file
.br
stderr	standard error file
.PP
.I Fopen
opens the file named by
.I name
and associates a stream with it;
.I f
identifies the stream in subsequent operations.
.PP
.I Fdopen
associates a stream with a file descriptor obtained from
Open, Dup, Creat, or Pipe(2).
The
.I mode
of the stream must agree with the mode of the open file.
.PP
.I Fclose
causes any buffers for the named stream to be emptied,
and the file to be closed.
.PP
.I Fread
reads, into a block beginning at
.IR ptr ,
.I nitems
of data of the type of
.I ptr
with size
.IR size .
.I Nitems
gives back the number of items actually read.
.PP
.I Fwrite
appends at most
.I nitems
of data of the type of
.I ptr
with size
.I size
beginning at
.I ptr
to the named output stream.
.I Nitems
gives back the number of items actually written.
.PP
.I Fseek
sets the position of the next input or output operation
on the stream.
The new position is at the signed distance
.I offset
bytes from the beginning, the current position, or the end of the file,
according as
.I whence
has the value 0, 1, or 2.
.PP
.I Ftell
sets
.I pos
to the current position.
.PP
.I Feof
returns
.B TRUE
when end of file is read on the named input stream,
otherwise
.BR FALSE .
.PP
.I Ferror
returns
.B TRUE
when an error has occurred reading or writing the
named stream, otherwise
.BR FALSE .
The error indication lasts until the stream is closed.
.PP
.I Fgetc
sets
.I ch
to the next character of the input stream.
.PP
.I Fputc
appends the character
.I ch
at the stream
.IR f .
.PP
.I Fungetc
pushes
.I ch
back to the input stream
.IR f .
.PP
.I CloseAll
closes all open streams.
.PP
.I Fflush
causes any buffered data for the named output stream
to be written to that file.
The stream remains open.
.PP
The streams
.IR stdin ,
.IR stdout ,
.I stderr
may be reopened:
.PP
.DS
IF NOT Fclose(stdin) OR
   NOT Fopen(stdin, file, mode, buffered) THEN
   (* error case *)
.br
END;
.DE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
InOut(3MOD), FtdIO(3MOD)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
All routines return
.B FALSE
in error case.
