.TH MDB 1 "local:Borchert"
.SH NAME
mdb \- Modula-2 debugger
.SH SYNOPSIS
mdb [-f] [objfile [corfile]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Mdb
is a Modula-2 debugging tool.
.I Objfile
is an executable program file (default: a.out).
.I Corfile
is assumed to be a core image file produced after executing
.I objfile;
the default for
.I corfile
is core.
Under f-option
.I mdb
gives a backtrace and error diagnostics.
Otherwise
.I mdb
changes to command mode.
.SH WINDOWS
.I Mdb
builds up a tree of windows according to the program found in
.I objfile
and the reference files of the modules used in the program.
The
.I M-window
(i.e. the root) contains the list of all global modules.
The
.I D-windows
show the contents of all variables of a certain level.
The procedure backtrace is shown in the
.I P-window.
You can examine parts of your source code by using the
.I T-window.
The
.I C-window
enables you to read the core dump.
For example, you select a certain procedure shown in the
.I P-window
by moving the cursor to it, then change to
.I D-window
to examine the variable values.
The
.I I-window
allows to examine disassembled code.
.SH COMMANDS
The command lines of the mdb are of the following syntax:
.TS
center;
l l.

line	= cmd { ";" cmd }.
cmd	= count letter { arg } .
arg	= intarg | strarg .
count	= intarg .
intarg	= ["-"] digit { digit } [H|B] .
strarg	= text | "'" text "'" | '"' text '"' .
.TE
.TP 5
.B "q, x"
\c
exit
.TP 5
.B "!"
\c
shell command
.TP 5
.B "= value ['x'|'d'|'o']
convert
.I value
into hexadecimal, decimal (default) or octal format.
.TP 5
.B e
\c
print run time error messages
.TP 5
.B h
\c
displays an overview of the commands.
.TP 5
.B i [address] ['d'|'t']
\c
switches to the \fII-window\fP at location
.I address
in space 't' (a.out-file: default) or 'd' (core-file / current process).
If
.I address
isn't specified the next instruction after the last 'i' command
will be printed.
.TP 5
.B "$m ['x'|'d'|'o']"
\c
print map in hexidecimal (default),
decimal, or octal format (for further information about maps see sdb(1)).
.TP 5
.B "$r ['x'|'d'|'o']"
\c
print register contents and the last instruction.
If a run time library routine is executed,
two instructions will be printed:
that of the library routine and the next instruction
of the Modula-2 procedure.
.PP
.B "Window Switches"
.TP 5
.B p
\c
switch to
.I P-window.
.TP 5
.B "P [pdesc]"
\c
Modula-2 process switch.
The optional parameter specifies the address of a process descriptor.
The address may be omitted if being in a
.I D-window
and a process variable have been choosen.
.TP 5
.B M
\c
Switch to current coroutine.
(Useful after 'P' command.)
.TP 5
.B d
\c
switch to
.I D-window.
.TP 5
.B m
\c
switch to
.I M-window.
.TP 5
.B "c [address ['x'|'d'|'o'|'c' ['x'|'d'|'o']]]"
\c
switch to
.I C-window.
The
.I C-window
starts at
.I address
if specified,
else it displays the contents of the current variable.
The second parameter determines the data format,
the third paramter determines the address format.
.TP 5
.B "t [filename]"
\c
switch to
.I T-window.
.PP
.B Positioning
.TP 5
.B "<return>, + [lines]"
\c
next line / move
.I lines
lines (default: 1) forward.
.TP 5
.B "- [lines]"
\c
move
.I lines
lines (default: 1) backward.
.TP 5
.B "b"
\c
display last page.
.TP 5
.B "n"
\c
display next page.
.TP 5
.B "u"
\c
print context of current line.
.TP 5
.B "/pattern"
\c
search forward for pattern.
.TP 5
.B "?pattern"
\c
search backwards for pattern.
.PP
.B Process Control
.TP 5
.B R
\c
start process
.TP 5
.B C
\c
continue process
.TP 5
.B I
\c
continue process and ignore last interrupt
.PP
.B Breakpoints
.PP
Breakpoints may be set at the begin and end of every procedure.
For each breakpoint a counter has to be specified
according to following rule:
.TP 10
0
\c
ignore breakpoint
.TP 10
n > 0
\c
stop when breakpoint is reached the
n-th time
and delete breakpoint.
.TP 10
-1
\c
stop every time breakpoint is reached.
.PP
.TP 5
.B "B [count1 [count2]]"
\c
set breakpoints at begin of the procedure (\fIcount1\fP)
and at the end of the procedure (\fIcount2\fP).
.TP 5
.B D
\c
delete breakpoint
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 5
.B "MODPATH"
\c
.I MODPATH
specifies a list of directories separated by colons.
This path is used for the search of reference file archives named
.I REF.
.TP 5
.B "SRCPATH"
\c
This path is used on the search for source files (\fIT-window\fP!)
and reference files.
.TP 5
.B "MDBPS"
\c
defines the prompt (default: "> ").
.SH CAVEATS
Avoid commands like "/7" because 7 is interpreted as an integer
argument and "/" expects a string argument.
The correct solution ist "/'7'" which enforces the "7" to be interpreted
as string argument.
.SH SEE ALSO
m2c(1)
.SH FILES
.ta \w'/u/lib/modula/REF   'u
*.r	reference files
.br
REF	archive with reference files
.br
/u/lib/modula/REF	Modula-2 library reference files
.br
a.out	default object file
.br
core	default core file
